# Ancient Greece
## The Pre-Classical Era 
Until the 8th century BC, Greece had experienced its own dark ages. These dark ages had come about due to the collapse of the Mycenaean Civilization some 3-400 years prior. Because of these Dark Ages, there was a loss of literacy, and a loss of the Mycenaean writing system. The Greeks therefore adopted the Phoenician alphabet and created from it the Greek alphabet. Greece at this time was composed of various autonomous communities, the borders of which were defined by their geography, for example, by being divided either by the sea or surrounding mountain ranges.

The earliest recorded war in Ancient Greece was the 60 year long Lelantine war (710-650 BC), which was fought between the city-states (*poleis*) of Eretria and Chalcis over the fertile land of the island of Evia known as the Lelantine plains. Despite Chalcis being named the victor of the war, both poleis appear to have suffered decline as a result of the conflict.

In Sparta, the military conquest of Messenia (a region of the Peloponnese peninsula) resulted in the subjugation of the Messenians in the later part of the 8th century BC. From this ensued a dramatic change in social structure in Sparta, with the emergence of a class of farmers and laborers being known as *helots*, and a warrior class composed of every male citizen of Sparta, having been permanently enlisted. Military service was required of men rich and poor alike, thus limiting socio-economic tension between the two. These developments are attrtibuted to the reforms of Lycurgus, which are understood to have been completely implemented by 650 BC.

A merchant class had arisen in Greece after the introduction of coined currency in the 7th century BC. Many Greek city states had seen an increase in political tension as a result, as the local aristocrats had feared the political ambitions of the wealthy. Populist rhetoric coming from the politically ambitious had become common in the Greek city-states, which the aristocracy had to defend their own power against. Another source of political and class-based tension at this time was an increasing population coupled with a shortage of land. 

In the later part of the 7th century BC, Athens had experienced a crisis related to land and farming, thus resulting once again in civil tensions. In response, Draco, the *Archon* or chief magistrate of Athens had severely altered the Athenian law code in 621 BC, in a failed attempt to solve the strife. This is where our word *draconian* comes from. Eventually the legislator Solon had reformed the Athenian law code to be more moderate. This served to somewhat stabilize Athens and ease the burdens of the poor, but had also served to solidify the status of the Athenian aristocracy. 

By the next century, many of the region's city states had gained prominence in the area, such as Athens, Sparta, Corinth, and Thebes. All of these city states had by this point expanded their territories outward, absorbing local towns and rural lands. Athens and Corinth, had also by this time come to be major forces in both trade and over the seas. 

As a result of the quickly growing Greek populations, many Greeks had fled the mainland, creating new settlements in Southern Italy and Sicily (*Magna Graecia*) as well as in Asia Minor (modern day Turkey) and thus expanded Greek influence well beyond the area of Greece as we know it today. While we understand these settlements to be "colonies", they were not connected to mainland Greece--as Early Modern European colonies were to their mother countries--but rather were merely only connected to mainland Greece via their shared religious practices and trade.

After the colonization of Sicily by Greek emigrants, conflicts with the Carthaginians of Northern Africa (especially in the city of Syracuse) soon erupted. These conflicts lasted several centuries, until the Roman Republic and its ally in the Italian mercenaries known as the *Mammertines* defended themselves against both the then tyrant of Syracuse, Hiero II, and the Carthaginians in 265 BC. From the end of these conflicts, the Roman republic had emerged as the dominant force of the region, as the prominence of Carthage and the Greek city-states in Sicily had declined. A year afterwards the first Punic War had erupted between Rome and Carthage. 

Between the years of 800 and 300 BC, Greece at large (including its colonies) had experienced tremendous levels of economic growth, with estimates concluding that the average household size quintupled in this period, indicating a dramatic increase in average household wealth.  

In the latter half of the 6th century BC, Athens had experienced the triple tyranny of Peisistratos and his sons Hippias and Hipparch. In the year 510 BC, the Athenian aristocrat Cleisthenes had convinced the Spartan king Cleomenes I to assist the Athenians in over throwing the the tyranny. After the overthrow, conflict broke out between Athens and Sparta with Sparta installing Isagoras as the archon. In an effort to retain independence from  Sparta, Cleisthenes instigated a democratic revolution, deposing Isagoras and resisting Spartan efforts to reinstall him as archon. From this point Athens had defended its newly founded democracy: a visionary form of government whereby all citizens shared power with one another regardless of social status. With democracy now being the Athenian way, many of the problems it had faced had been subsequently solved, and had paved the way for Athens to have its own Golden Age.

## The Classical Era
Up to the year 499 BC, the city-states of Ionia (the western coast of Modern day Turkey) had been under Persian rule. It is this year that the Ionians had rebelled against the tyrants who had ruled them. Having received support in the form of military personnel from Athens and Eretria they had advanced eastward until they had reached the city of Sardis, setting fire to it before having been driven out by the Persians. This rebellion continued for five years until the rebels were defeated in 494. Darius, the Persian king at the time (known now by the epithet "the Great") put together in 490 BC a fleet of warships (an *armada*) to retaliate against Athens for their role in the Ionian revolt. With this fleet, the Persians had invaded Greece, but were defeated by the Athenians at the Battle of Marathon with help from their allies from the city of Plataea (located to the northwest of Athens), causing the Persians to flee.

A decade later, a second invasion of mainland greece was launched by Xerxes, the son of Darius the Great. The city-states of northern and central Greece did not attemot to resist, but rather, simply submitted to the Persians. Despite this, thirty-one city states, including both Athens and Sparta, banded together, committed to resisting the Persian forces. Meanwhile, Carthaginian forces were invading the Greek colonies in Sicily. The first major battle of this invasion is the now famous Battle of Thermopylae (meaning "hot gates"), where a rearguard (a grouping of soldiers positioned usually at the back of a formation of troops) of 300 Spartans, led by King Leonidas I, held off the invading Persians for three days. As this was happening, it is supposed that the tyrant of the city of the Sicilian city of Syracuse repelled the Carthaginians at the battle of Himera. This supposed coincidence is rejected by modern historical scholars.

The naval battle at Salamis, composed mostly of Athenian forces, in conjunction with the land battle at Plataea, saw the decisive defeat of the Persians. From this point the alliance against Persia continued, having been led by Sparta (under Pausanias) until 477 BC when it began to be spearheaded by Athens. Come 460 BC the Persians were driven out of the Aegean Sea (the sea between modern-day Greece and Turkey). A year prior, in 478 BC, the Delian League was formed between 150-330 Greek city-states led by Athens at the island of Delos, where the League's treasury was. Despite initially being a defensive alliance, the Delian League quickly grew into Athens' naval empire. As such, Athens used its naval power to intimidate other members. Athens finally ended its efforts against Persia in in 450 BC after the death of their general Kimon, especially being that they were defeated four years prior by the Persians in Egypt.

As the fighting between Athens and Persia came to an end, conflict between Athens and Sparta grew. Sparta was growing suspicious of Athenian strength as it was being financially supported by the Delian League, so Sparta offered support to those members of the league who wished to diminish Athenian influence within the league. This tension was made worse when, in 462 BC, Athens offered to help Sparta put down a helot revolt and Sparta refused this offer. Over a decade later, Athens took control of the central region of Greece known as Boetia, also having seen victory over the island of Aegina and the city of Corinth. The victory over Boetia was not a decisive victory, and as such, Athens lost control of the region in 447 BC. The conflict with Sparta ended circa 445 BC with the signing of the Thirty Years' Peace. 

Despite its name, the peace did not last for very long, as tension once again grew between Athens and Sparta. In 431 BC the Peloponnesian war had broken out between the two powers. For the first part of the war, Sparta had staged a number of invasions of Attica (the peninsula on which Athens is located), with little to show for them. In the meantime, Athens had managed to successfully defend itself from the Corinthians, despite an out reak of plague which had cause the death of the Athenian leader Pericles. The Athenian general Cleon had led the Athenians to victory in both Pylos and the island of Sphakteria, both to the west of Sparta, causeing the war to turn in the Athenians' favor. Sparta had attempted a sue for peace, but Athens rejected it. Later in the war, Athens had failed to take back Boetia and the successes of the efforts of the Spartan officer Brasidas had improved Sparta's lot in the war after their loss at Sphakteria. With both Cleon and Brasidas, the strongest leaders on either side respectively, the Athenian general Nicias had negotiated a peace with Sparta in 421 BC. 

This negotiated peace, however, was short-lived. In 418 BC Athens and one of its allies were defeated by Spartan forces at Mantinaea, a city located in the region of Arcadia, branching off of southern mainland Greece. In 415, Athens had launched a disastrous, but ambition naval assault on Sicily, culminating in defeat at Syracuse, with almost all of the Athenian ships being destroyed and almost all of its army killed. Soon after, Athens's allies began to rebel and Persia once again began to aid the Spartan effort against Athens. Despite having won a couple of strategic victories, and having a relatively strong continued position in the war, the Spartan navarch (admiral) defeated Athenian forces in the Battle of Aegospotami, a strait in western modern-day Turkey. This led to a Spartan blockade of the Athenian harbor, causing Athens to sue for peace and agree to join the Pelopponesian League led by Sparta. 

As the 4th century BC began, Athens saw itself under Spartan dominance. This dominance, however was a weak one. Sparta had too much land for a shrinking population, and in 395, Athens, Argos, Thebes, and Corinth felt that the time was right to challenge this dominance. This resulted in the Corinthian war, which ended 8 years later, without a conclusive victor, returning to a state when Persia threatened to intervene on the side of Sparta. 

Spartan dominance lasted for just over another decade and a half. This is, until the Thebans successfully resisted an imposition of Spartan will upon them in 371 BC at the Battle of Leuctra (in Boetia of central Greece). Epaminondas, the Theban general promptly led an invasion of the Peloponnese, which inspired other city-states to resist the Spartans. The Thebans thereby led a successful effort to free the helot population. 

After the helots were freed Sparta's influence had fallen, its dominant position having been supplanted by Thebes. Theban dominance would not last, however, as the Theban leader Epaminondas would die at the Battle of Mantinea (in Arcadia, the Pelopponese) by Spartan hands in 362 BC. So devastating was the battle to all major city-states that none could dominate Greece in the wake of its aftermath.

As mainland Greece was killing itself through internal conflict between city-states vying for hegemony, Macedon was rising. Under Philip II, Macedon was able to unify, expand its territory to the northwest (conquering the Illyrians of the region), and conquer both Thessaly in Greece and Thrace to the east. All of this was done in a matter of 20 years. A feat such as this was achieved due to innovations made in a reformation of the Macedonian army. Having already been intervening in the affairs of the Greek city-states, Philip II invaded in Greece in 338 BC.

Having defeated both Athens and Thebes at the Battle of Chaeronea (in Boetia, 338 BC), Philip came to dominate all of Greece, save for Sparta. Likewise, he had convinced most city-states to join his Hellenic league, which both pacified them and allied them to him. Philip promptly went to war with the Persians of the Achaemenid Empire, but was assassinated early on by one Pausanias of Orestis, a member of Philip's own personal bodyguard.
